I guess an underlying theme for what interests me the most, in biology and science in general,
to look for simple underlying principles, and my favorite, one of my favorite costos
paintings is this one that kind of illustrates that point where, as you can tell here, it goes
in this series of plates depicting a bull going from removing more and more detail until it gets
to the essence of the bull. And that's sort of my scientific reto that may be not fully embraced
in biology, universally, as it is embraced in math and physics and chemistry. And what I think is
one of the sort of big problems in the way biologists, and I mean by that mostly experimental
sort of mainstream biomedical science type of biology, is that we are addicted to complicate it
and devalue what's simple and often confuse it with what's simplistic. And in my definition,
I'd say simple is when you get rid of anything that's not essential for understanding the problem.
Simplistic is when you remove something that is important, and so it's you have to
get the right intuition not to confuse it. And complicated is when you add things that are
nonessential. And that's, I think we're all experiencing that phase in my medical research
now where there is too much of nonessential is added because methods are available to generate data.
And so that's what often makes complex systems look complicated, whereas as you all know,
the complex systems are not complicated. They have underlying simple rules. So what I chose to
talk about today is one of the aspects, one aspect of biology that we're interested in in lab,
which has to do with tissue biology and I would say cellular sociology or
social lives of cells. And because tissues are complex systems, composed of multiple
agents that are cells that interact in some way and generate all kinds of properties that we try to
understand. And the properties that we see, these are observables, and they don't tell us what the
rules are that generated them. And that's sort of the main interest in that area for me. So we think
about the notion of tissue, of course, is very familiar. It's a textbook notion. It's very commonly
used. We all kind of sort of know what we mean when we say tissues, but at the same time, they're
not well defined. If we try to give a definition to a cell, then we're fine to the organ to organ
systems, we can give formal definitions, but for tissues, we actually can't. And all the
available definitions are quite ambiguous. As our distinctions between tissues where one tissue
stops and other starts and so forth. So traditional classifications that are divide them into four
major types of epidial, connective, muscle, and neuronal. It has a limited utility, mostly when
we think in terms of development of organism, when we think in terms of pathology, in terms of
any kind of biology that operates at the tissue level, we don't think of tissues as
a peculiar versus neuronal and so on. It's always we think of it as a collection of cell types that
belong to all these different types of origin. So that's the first problem. So we are kind of
on a shaky ground to begin with, because we're dealing with something that's ill-defined.
And that leads to these major gaps in our understanding of tissues. What are the
patterns of cell organization within tissues? What aspects are pre-programmed versus emergent?
And what are general themes and what are special cases? And that's again,
something that I think biologists depreciate less than let's say physicists, distinguishing
special cases from general cases. And that's what makes this whole area so interesting and
challenging and fascinating to understand. To use tissue biology as sort of an umbrella term
for understanding social organization of cells to think of cells as agents in a complex system.
And so this is to just illustrate what exactly our gaps in understanding are. If we compare
organismal biology, cell biology, and tissue biology, it's very clear that in tissue biology we
are limited by understanding, not so much by data, but by understanding.
So in organismal biology, we can tell that these animals that look drastically different,
they're all variations on the theme of a mammal. And we can tell that there are some deviations from
the common theme that we see in whales, shrews, and so forth. But we can imagine a generic mammal
with all the universal parts, all the organ systems, they all have
central nervous system, two lungs, two kidneys, and so forth. And we know how they function,
we connect it, and we can draw a generic like a schema of a mammal. And then we can also say that
a mammal is a special case of vertebrate, which is more general schema and so forth. If we go to
cells, the biology cell level is the same, we can look at this and these are dramatically different
cells, dramatically different looking cells, especially if they were drawn to scale, it would
be even more dramatic difference. And yet we know that this is all variation on the common theme of
eukaryotic cell, mammalian cells shown here on the right. And we are not fooled by the fact that
the most abundant and most easily accessible cell type, which is a red blood cell,
actually doesn't have a nucleus in mammals. We don't conclude from that that most cell types
don't have nucleus. And therefore, this is something essential and important to understand. So
we're not confused by that because we know enough cell biology to tell that this is a special case.
And the reason I'm emphasizing this is because in here, it's an obvious case of general versus
special. But when we lack that understanding, we can be confused by looking at something that's
most common, most observable. And we don't have the right intuition to tell if it's a general case
or special case. So at tissue level, at the cell level, at organismal level, we have that type of
knowledge. But if we look at the tissue level with different tissues, and then now we can tell
whether these tissues coming from different organs all represent variations on a theme.
And what that generic theme is, and we cannot draw that generic tissue the way we can for generic
cell or generic organism. And we don't know if there is one theme, and these are also kind
of deviations or variations on that theme, or there may be more than one thing, or maybe there
are no common themes at all. But presumably, there are common things because all tissues
have to solve the same set of problems. They have to solve a problem of having the right cell type
in the right ratios, right quantities, right spatial arrangements, and so forth. They should
have some of the others. And these are the same problems every tissue in every animal has to
solve. And presumably, it's been solved once in the beginning, and then everything was built on
that solution. And therefore, we have a reason to think that there are general principles and
general themes, and everything is some variations on these themes. And some of these cases may indeed
be special cases. And that's what we want to understand, and that's what we currently don't
understand. So instead, we have this is a picture like this, which is a textbook picture of what's
supposed to be tissue. And so the questions we want to understand is what the rules that define,
for example, cellular composition of tissues, how these different cell types know that they belong
there in the right amounts, in the right proportions, in the right locations, and so forth.
And if we approach it from the way that generally we approach something unknown, we try to kind of
catalog things, we describe them by shapes by whatever some properties that we can measure.
Nowadays, we do it by single cell analysis by imaging and so forth. And we generate this ever
more complete catalog of characteristics. And that catalog doesn't bring us any closer to
addressing the questions I mentioned in the previous slide. And
there is a little doubt that having ever more complete description of cells and tissues
using whatever next generation methodologies might be that may image every single molecule,
let's say, and so forth, the amount of data will grow astronomically. And yet it's not going to
bring us any closer to addressing the questions that I mentioned in the previous slide.
And let's just use an analogy here for, like, let's say if you're an alien and you're doing,
you know, PhD thesis on human social structure, you came to Earth and you look at people and you
have this very powerful alien technologies that allow you to characterize everything you want
about every human being. And you get the characteristics like names, height, weight, color of
eyes, color of hair, insulin, glucose measurements, heart rate, and you catalog that increasingly.
You know how many cells that person has versus that person has. And clearly that kind of data
would be completely useless to understand what the human social structure is.
On the other hand, if you approach it from a different perspective, you look at the human
social group, and you start noticing that there is some ways that these different individuals
relate each other that may define not identities, like identity characteristics,
like name, height, weight, and so forth, but rather that some of them are parents and some of them
are children, some of them are husbands and wives, some of them colleagues, some of them friends,
some enemies, and so forth. And what all these words mean, these are categories. So there's a
category of the parent, category of scientists, category of neighbors. But these categories
defined, if we compare category of a parent or neighbor or friend versus the category of
a good person or bad person or a scientist by profession. So the profession category is still
the cataloging category. It's just like the names and heights and whatever, body mass.
Parent, friend, neighbor, these are categories that are defined by relations. And what I think is
needed, we have the notion of a cell type, and we have increasingly detailed characteristics of
cell types. And that's just like getting more and more data about individuals. But what we need is
to go from cell types, which is a useful and fundamental notion, to the notion of cell categories.
And the way they can be defined is just like the aliens who define social structure.
They need to be defined in terms of relations. So just like relation parent child provides deep
insight into social structure or relation, friends and enemies and so forth, those are provides
deep insights that can explain social structure. Similarly, if we define cell relations,
appropriate types of what would be the appropriate types of relations, that will give us insight
into social organization of cells. And so what I think we need to do is to,
rather than being obsessed with getting more and more granular data about,
you know, the identity characteristics, we need to define some categories based on relations.
And so we need to ask what are different cell types equivalent in some ways in terms of their
roles in tissue organization. So that would define their relation, right? So if you have a teacher
in one school, teacher in another school, they may teach different subjects, but they're defined by
the relation of teacher and student. And if we know that relation, then we can say, okay, there's a
category of teacher and there's category of student. So what are the appropriate
relevant categories for cells? And also, I would mention that not all relations are equally informative.
Right? So the category, some get some relations, some more fundamental than others. So the same
would apply to cells. And so we can define this, what would be called equals. So relations here,
I mean in more like in mathematical terms, like the way the relations are defined on sets. And they
can be symmetric, reflexive, transitive. And so it's in that kind of spirit of the way that
relations defines on sets, it's basically a way to partition set. So we have a set of cells and
what are different ways we can partition it, just like we can take social group and partition it
into parents, children, teachers, students and so forth. And that I think is what is missing and
what's limiting that we don't have that kind of a perspective. And this is something we're actually
working on, sort of from theory perspective, I'll just give a sense of what we're thinking now,
because we don't have a complete list of that yet. So this is the visual representation of what I
mean that we go from cell type paradigm, where we describe cell types, type A, B, C and D, to cell
relations paradigm, which will define cell categories. And here, for example, one relation will define
between these two cell types and other relation between these two cell types and so on. And
importantly, this relation, let's say relation A, may apply not just for this epithelial and
this mesenchymal cell, it may apply to other pairs of cells that belong to different types.
And that's what's critical, because that's where we hit the wall when we try to understand
general principle, and then we find, oh, macrophage is doing something here. So therefore,
macrophage is a cell type, it has this kind of a property. And then we don't find that example
somewhere else and say, oh, oops, it's not generalizable. It may not be generalizable for cell type,
but as a relation, it would be. So that's the general idea. And what are the types of relations?
So I will just use a few examples to illustrate it. And the first example also deals with the
notion of what is the general theme in tissue organization. And if we think about what's the
simplest setup for an animal, we would see that all animals have epithelial mesenchymal
units as the most fundamental, most ancient units of organization of tissues. There are
no animals that don't have epithelial mesenchymal units, even the simplest, like spongy and
plecozoa, that's basically, they pretty much don't have anything else, but that's what you
have to have an animal. And they always have a particular type of arrangement. Epithelial cells,
of course, form a polarized sheet. Mesenchymal cells are underneath and they're separated by
basically membrane. So that's a general structural setup. But what's interesting going beyond that
is that there is a particular type of relation between mesenchym and epithelium. And that relation
in one instance is based on a symmetry in information transfer. So mesenchymal cells,
for example, have positional information encoded by Hawke's genes. That translates into the choice
of appropriate morphogen signals that they produce, for example, and then epithelial cells have
several fade choices. And then mesenchymal cells through this morphogen signal dictate the fade
choice that would be appropriate for a given positional information. So we have this type of
instructional relation here. And this is seen as a common theme in development where mesenchymal
will affect the epithelium to shape it into different organs, different spatial structures
and so forth. And you can particularly well see to this development of different types of glands,
which you can see in the next slide even better. We can say now you go from this generic
organization of epithelium mesenchymal. Mesenchymal is not shown here for simplicity.
And then you can get all kinds of structures through a process of continuous transformation.
So if you think about it as geometric transformation, it's an example of
continuous transformation. There's nothing fundamentally new added here.
All that happens is continuous transformation. These are all topologically in bearing.
And that means that by just using that simple module and just adding the variables that affect
the degree of branching, you can generate all sorts of structures. And from a simple gut tube,
you can go to making various types of glands. And ultimately, you can make pancreas and liver
and lungs and all by process of continuous transformation. So that's how powerful that
effect of a relation between mesenchym and epithelium is. And of course, this goes back to
Mangolton-Spemian classical experiments of transplanting epidermis from one part of a bird
to another part of the bird and observing that the appendages formed by epidermis
are entirely defined by the underlying dermal structure, which is underlying mesenchym.
And from that came the notion that mesenchym has some information about the map of the body,
which we now is encoded by Hofstein's, and that the epidermis or epithelium has several
features, is in this case, forming different kinds of appendages, feathers of different
sorts of scales, and that's dictated by mesenchym. So now we take that. So here we're talking as
biologists, mesenchym at the dermis feathers, and we abstract from that and say, okay, we have one
type of cell, let's call it M cell, doesn't have to be mesenchym. We have another type of cell,
let's call it E cell, doesn't have to be epithelial. And we define this as categories based on the
relation between them. And the relation is as follows. M cell has some information,
in one instance, positional information. E cell has some fake choices. In one instance,
this would be feathers and things like that. And M cell dictates the fake choice of E cell.
And this we can generalize them and sell that these are definitions of these two categories of
cell that are based on the relation between them. And now we don't have to be attached to dermals,
feathers, scales and things like that. Now we can say there are two categories of cell.
And in addition to dermal and epidermal, as a relation between M and E, we can have other types
of biological scenarios. For example, M cell could be niche cell and E cell could be stem cell,
because they also have the same relation. Niche cell defining fake choices of stem cells,
cell renewal differentiation and so forth. Then we have a relation in immunology between
the grid cell and T cells. So the grid cell have some information about what kind of pathogen
they encounter. Naive T cells, which is T cells that haven't been yet encountered any signals,
they have fake choices. They can become different types of effector cells, memory cells,
so forth. What dictates that fake choice signals produced by dendritic cells? Because dendritic
cells have that information, in this case it's not positional information, but information they
receive from encountering pathogens. And more generally, we can say for any control circuit,
including homeostatic control circuit, sensors and effectors are two types of the circuit that
where sensors has some information about whatever it monitors. And the effector can do something
about it. It has some choices. Thermostat and AC, for example, like thermosensor knows what
temperature is. AC has options to increase or decrease, to turn on and off and so forth.
Same with beta cell and liver, beta cell knows what glucose concentration liver knows what to do
about it. When beta cell tells it what to do through insulin. So this is a general relation.
What are other possible types of relation? I'm not going to dwell on many of them, but I will
just mention one or two more. So the second type is a functional relation. And this relates to a
more familiar notion of division of labor. So here we have a classical textbook division of labor,
when two cells are specialized on performing two different functions, A and B, independently of
each other. The second type of relation would be division of labor, would be when two cells
both contribute to the same function. And if you remove either of them, there is no function.
So modern neuron and skeletal muscle form the motor unit, and you need both types of cells to
have that function of movement. So they are functionally complementary. So that's that's
now a type of relation. Here we can say this is also a relation, but it's a null relation.
Here it's a complementary functional complementarity. The third type of relation that hasn't
been described in literature, but I think is equally important, is a relation when one cell
type is specialized on a particular function. Another cell type is fully dedicated just
supporting the function of the other cell. So example would be, for example, again,
this could be modern neuron, and the supporting cell would be Schwann cell. So the whole purpose
of life for Schwann cell is to support function of the neuron. Neuron is the one that performs
primary function. Schwann cell just helps it to perform it better. There are neurons without
Schwann cells. There are no Schwann cells without neurons. Schwann cell doesn't have meaning outside
of the neuron. It's like a gold player and caddy. We can play both without a caddy, but caddy without
a gold player makes no sense. And that's what how some cells are, a pericyte and the trivial cell,
the same example and so forth. So there are many cell types, particularly in more complex
metazones, that are of this type where they perform supportive functions,
and then other cell types perform primary functions. So here we have, again, a relation.
It's like somebody who has, let's say, servants, like cooks and drivers, cleaners.
There is that type of relation. So what happens is that the driver, cleaner and cook, in this case,
are defined by their relation to whoever they serve. And what that also illustrates is the way
that this type of relation evolves is that when this cell type gets more and more specialized on
a particular function, what it means that when you specialize on something, it means you do
fewer things better and better, right? Fewer and fewer things better and better. If you are like a
famous, whatever, piano player and you don't have time to clean and shop and do chores,
you hire people who do that for you. But what it means you delegate some of the functions
to supporting staff, supporting cells. So neuron delegates a lot of functions to
bleed your cells, for example. And the same is true for all the other primary cell types.
They can be bothered to perform the same functions if you expect them to be
optimal at performing one function. That's what happens with humans. Also, of course, we get
progressively more specialized. And in the process of that, we delegate some of the functions to
other cells. And that in itself raises an interesting question. What can you delegate?
So, obviously, you can delegate functions that are not cell autonomous, but you cannot
delegate cell autonomous functions. You can delegate cooking to somebody you hire to cook for
you, but you cannot delegate eating, right? So certain types of functions are delegated and
these are non cell autonomous functions. And the genes that perform these functions can now
be expressed in cells that are supporting the performance support function. And that's what
seen in gene expression profiles and tissue specific characteristics of cells that are
ubiquitous in tissues like macrophages and so forth. So these are some other examples. I'm not
going to go through all of them, but these are some other examples of cell relations
that we can think of. This can be already mentioned, instructive relation, functional
relations, then there could be supply consumer relation, hierarchical relations, and there
could be also relations based on mutual exclusivity. For example, if cell A is present somewhere,
it's never in a company of cell B. These are mutually excluded. We don't know, I mean,
the examples like this exist, but we don't know if these are, they need to be defined in a more
strict way. This is more for, for illustration purposes here. Okay, so from here, we can now
go back to this picture we had before. And now we can look at a very different light. We can say,
okay, what do we have here? We have these various types of cells. They're not all equally important
because you can remove some of the cells and tissue will retain its architecture. You can
remove T cells and you lose some functionalities, but you still have the same tissue architecture.
You remove fibroglas and it collapses. So they are unequal in that regard. And what that means
is that some cells are more important than others for tissue architecture. They all have
their distinct functionalities, but in terms of tissue architecture, they are not equal.
And that raises the question, which ones are the most important ones? And so we can also now
look at it from the perspective in structural relations, functional relations, and so on. So
now instead of being concerned with cell shapes and whatever, transcriptomics, proteomics, these
sort of things, we can label them as different, different categories and the patterns would
start emerging, right? And so if you imagine them just as little circles, it is different colors.
And we defined relations between colors. So the colors will represent categories.
And so if we start thinking about what are the most fundamental categories and what are the most
important, important cell types for tissue architecture, for organization of tissues,
not for functionalities, for organization of tissues. As I mentioned in the very beginning
of MetaZone Life, it was a bacterial mesenchymal unit with the basement membrane in between,
and that's what led to the diversification of various types of organization. In vertebrates,
I think we have a minimal tissue unit that is based on that original theme,
and that minimal unit consists of four types of cells or four categories. Three of them correspond
to types usually for most organs, but these are categories. So we have a category of a tissue
specific cell that is responsible for core tissue function. This is the cell type responsible for
the primary function of the tissue. In the brain, it would be neuron, in the gut, it would be gut
epithelium, and so forth. And then we always have three additional cell types that are nearly
universally present in all tissues, and that includes, of course, microvascular endothelium.
It includes stromal cell, fibroblast-like cells, and it includes tissue resin macrophage.
So these three correspond to cell types performing supportive functions. So now we define this
minimal unit based on relation between these supportive cell types that are universal in
every tissue and tissue-specific primary cell type that obviously perform these different
different tissues because it performs tissue-specific primary functions. Now in the gut, we have,
let's say, intestinal epithelium, then we have these three cell types. They are not involved in the
primary function of the gut, which is digestion absorption, but without these cell types, of
course, epithelial cells cannot perform that function. In the brain, we have neurons and
glial cells, the same idea. So these supportive cell types are always there to
support the function of the client cell. So we can call this a client cell by analogy with
chaperones. And so then what we have is that client cells delegate some of the functions to
supportive cell types, and some delegated functions need to be performed all the time
constitutionally, and this become tissue-resident cells. But some functions only need to be performed
on demand. And these are delegated to cells that are not resident in the tissue, but can be recruited
to the tissue. And this is the case for vertebrates, or any animal is plus circulation. And that would
be the case of inflammatory cells. So neutrophils, you only need them when there is an infection,
whereas macrophage, you need in tissue all the time, because macrophages have many jobs.
They're like butlers. They can do a lot of things. But when there is a really big problem,
you need specialists, and there would be neutrophils. And so then we can think of the way that the
biological development of tissue architecture goes from this base case, which is what the
beginning of animal life history, as well as the beginning of any animal during development,
embryonic development, starts with a pithelium, then generate mesenchymal by EMT, and then from
there you go through this process of instructive relations and generate all kinds of tissues.
But the derived case that is universal theme now for vertebrate architecture organization,
this is only talking about compositional organization, not spatial organization.
The general theme would be that you always have the primary cell type, which is the primary
function of tissue, it's tissue specific and three supportive cell types. And that's what we can think
of as a first approximation. This is of course in very broad strokes. And this is only thinking
about the compositional organization of tissue, not structural. But even from that perspective,
there are many deep questions one can ask. We don't know the answers to most of them,
but mostly I would say because the questions have not been asked that way. So one has to do with
one of my big interests for me is understanding biology of cell communication and particularly
biology of growth act. So every cell in the animal, every normal cell that is not cancerous cell
requires specific growth factors to stay alive and to be present in the tissue.
The cells that don't have their specific growth factor will die by default. So cell composition
of tissue is dictated by local availability of these linear restricted growth factors for macrophage
to be CSF1 from fibroblast PDG of beta and so forth. In the telial cells, whether they're
GMF and other angiogenic factors, and the cell will have different growth factors depending
on what the identity is. So then the question becomes that the cell composition, because it's
a function of local availability of specific growth factors, what kind of cell in what amounts,
in what location you will have in the tissue is entirely dictated by local provisional growth
factor in particular place in particular amounts. So then the question then becomes what are the
rules and mechanisms that ensure production of appropriate growth factors in the right amounts
in the right places. And that, because we don't know those rules, I think that that provides a
major, major conceptual gap in our understanding of development and tissue biology. So we're
interested in this question and this is of course, this is not one set of rule, it needs a systematic
study and of course in the lab we can only do, you know, proof of concept studies. So the question
is as follows. So the growth factors of that type, the type that are called linear restricted
growth factors that are necessary for each cell to survive. Production of these growth factors is
typically the source of them is another cell type. If this is growth factor for cell Y,
it's typically produced by cell X, which is a different cell type. So cell X makes growth
factor for cell Y and the amount of that growth factor determines the number of cell Y is where
they are location, because these growth factors typically have small diffusion radius, and they
are often deposited on ECM. And then question becomes how does these cells, cell X knows which
growth factor to make and how much to make. Okay, we can say well, which growth factor to make
could be hard wires, it could be part of the identity that if you sell X, you program to make
growth factor for cell Y, that's fair assumption. And there are cases when it is indeed the case
that it's produces, it's already knows which growth factor to make. In other cases, it needs to be
told. And it can be told by cell Y itself. Cell Y tells it that I need, my identity is Y, and I
need growth factor that supports cell Y. And what that communication is like, that's the part that
we also interested in understanding, and we still don't know all the details, but we know that there
is indeed this type of communication. So the question is what determines this, this
controls the appropriate production level. And I'll go through this example very quickly,
because it was published, but we use microphase fibroblasts as a case study to as a proof of
concept study to characterize in exchange of these two growth factors, which are well defined for
these cells, it's CSF1 for macrophage produced by fibroblasts and PDGF for fibroblasts produced by
macrophage. And what we found in that study a few years ago is that if we define conditions such that
if you take individually the cell type, and don't provide exogenous recombinant growth factors,
they will die as expected, each of them will die. But because they can each produce growth
factor for the other guy, we ask whether they can support each other under those conditions where
there is no external growth factor. And they can indeed, and not only that, they could also
reach stable ratio, even if we vary initial ratio by hundredfold, they all convert to stable ratio,
which implies that they're not simply feeding each other growth factor that would lead to
uncontrolled growth, but rather there is some kind of a circuit design of the exchange of growth
factors that results in stability. And indeed, there is a circuit design that results in stability,
and it's shown here. So that's what we found both experimentally and through modeling,
that the for the two cell types to be stable, one has to be limited by carrying capacity, which is
limitation external to the system, just like in ecology, carrying capacity, space, food, and so
on. And the other cell type has to be limited, it has to have a negative feedback on a growth
factor it receives from the first cell type. And as long as these two conditions are met,
you can, you will have a stable system. But these conditions are met only in 24 out of
144 total cases of total number of possible cell circuit topologies. Of them only 24 are
stable, and all of them have these two conditions met. And this is what it would look like if X1
is here would be fibroblast X2 macrophage, this is a phase portrait of the dynamic behavior,
we have the same experimental data. And this is the predicted on state, which is what we observe.
And as you can see, the system will evolve towards the stable on state, and this is stable
off state when there are no cells. But what was interesting in this case, it also, we also found
additional on state, stable on state for one cell type for fibroblast, but only when the density
of the cell was above some threshold. And in ecology, this type of phenomenon is known as
Ali effect. Ali effect means that population will undergo expansion, only if it is above
some critical density. So for example, and for penguins, they cannot survive in the
wild if there is not enough of them, because they need to huddle to keep each other warm.
Pack of wolves, one wolf would not survive because they hunt in packs and things like that.
So this is Ali effect. And we see that there is Ali effect in cell ecology as well. And specifically
for fibroblasts, it requires if they reach critical density, they now can support each
other without macrophage. And the reason for that is this autographed signal. And that signal is
provided by PTGF alpha and HBGF. And so that that's what type of scenarios we see that for
this is stable observed state. With autographed signal, you have this additional stable state
that could be pathological because when you have fibroblasts without macrophage, this is basically
the case of fibrosis. So this type of circuit design creates vulnerability for fibrosis.
But then there are other designs that we find through computationally, and they presumably
exist also amongst cell-cell interactions. In this case, if you don't have autographed signal,
you don't have this pathological stable state with cell X1 alone. But on the other hand,
so these type of tissues that have the cells with this circuit of interaction will not be
vulnerable to fibrosis. But on the other hand, the basin of attraction to the off state is much
bigger here, which may suggest that these type of tissues will be vulnerable to degenerative
disease instead of fibroly disease. And this is something that we're still exploring. That's
indeed the case. So from that, what we find is that there is this relation between cells
based on growth factor production that is dictated by critical growth factor topology
and that there is a simple requirement for stability that we can define and that this
can be generalized to other types of interactions where it's the same topology doesn't. And from that
we then wanted to ask the next question, what controls the size of the compartments and tissues?
And there are two paradigms that existed side by side for decades. One paradigm for
compartmental size control is basically space availability. And that cells, if they have cells
to expand to, they will expand. When they don't have space to expand to, they stop expanding.
This is contact inhibition in vitro. But in vivo, this would apply to cells that use
mechanosensing, for example, to determine when they have to stop dividing. And this type of
mechanosensing, for example, famously operates through the hippo pathway. And that paradigm works
for these types of tissues. But it would not be applicable to tissues that are not limited by
space, like macrophages lymphocytes and a hematopoietic cell. So then the question is what
control this compartment size? And that's where second paradigm is applicable. And that is that
every cell needs growth active to survive and to proliferate. And if you fix the amount of
growth factor to the appropriate level, the cells will expand if there is more growth factor than
the cells that it can support. But once they reach that level, further expansion will result
cells that now don't have enough growth factor and they will die. And so it's above that level.
It will go down. If it's below that level, they will expand. And that's how you can, and that
clearly that's how it works for hematopoietic cells. That's well known. You can change the amount
of retropoietin, for example, or GCSF while seven and you can control different hematopoietic
cell size numbers. But what was striking for us is that these two paradigms applied exactly to the
two cell types that we use in our study. And again, if we think from the cell category perspective,
we have one category of cell that is limited by one population size control paradigm.
And the other cell type that's controlled by another paradigm. And we asked whether this is
just purely a lucky coincidence or curious coincidence or if there is some deeper inside
here. And specifically, we asked whether, because fibroblast controlled by space availability,
so carrying capacity of the environment and microphase by growth factor availability, we asked
whether production of growth factor by fibroblast is a function of space availability it can detect.
And that's exactly what we found that we, when we looked at fibroblasts growing them at different
densities as to mimic space availability, we find there's a number of genes that control
in density dependent manner and amongst them growth factors like CSF1 and many others.
And so that indicated that CSF1, for example, would be expressed at higher level when cells are at
lower density. And as density increases, it will be at lower level. And this way you adjust the
numbers of fibroblasts dictated by space availability to the number of macrophages dictated by CSF1
availability that they produce as a function of space. I have a quick question. Sorry to interrupt
you, but so I know that the ECM plays a large role in growth factor availability. It acts like a
sink. It acts as like a release factor. Have you looked at all at, because in cell density, you
start to build up a certain amount of ECM as well as the number of cells. Have you looked at whether
or not if you co-template with the ECM that these cells would normally lay down,
if that would have the same effect as the cell density?
Yes, we have. The answer is a bit more kind of involved to you. It's a very important question
and we're really interested in understanding how ECM contributes to that. We know that it's a little
bit, it will take us a bit far from the main topic here, but what we know is that in the case of
macrophage and fibroblast interaction, the exchange of growth factors is cell contact dependent. Moreover,
fibroblasts that receive PDGF from macrophage will only receive PDGF from macrophage if it
provides that macrophage with CSF1. If we remove CSF1 from half of fibroblasts, mix them with the
well-typed ones, give them macrophages in the same system I described. Fibroblasts that don't
contribute growth factor do not receive growth factor. It operates in a cell. It's like a
gangster movies where you give the drug and the case with drug and case with money and you exchange
it like this and you don't just give and trust the other one. It's some kind of a maybe anti-cheater
strategy, but it is a direct exchange in these things. There are some other interesting, very
interesting scenarios, as you mentioned, because there is a form of CSF1 that is proteoglycan form,
but in this case it wasn't a factor. We tried to simplify to look at, with a minimal number of
variables, but it is a very important point. There is a mechanosensing by both fibroblasts
and macrophages also, a thing that I'm not going to discuss, where we find that macrophages use
very fundamentally different mechanosensing strategy compared to fibroblasts or bacterial cells.
Sorry, so just to finish this quickly, this part, what we find is that there is a
density sensitive enhancer in fibroblasts that controls expression CSF1.
And when we perform motif enrichment analysis, we found that that sites were enriched in density
sensitive genes and that is DNA binding transcription factor controlled by hippo pathway.
And basically we found that hippo pathway controls, through this distant enhancer,
controls expression of CSF1 and fibroblasts, but not in other cell types. These enhancers
are only active in fibroblasts, and that one indeed is recruited there, it's shown here by
chromatin IP, and that's what controls expression of CSF1, leading to this kind of model, where we
have homeostatic or density sensitive enhancer in CSF1 gene that is operative in fibroblasts,
and it controls homeostatic expression of CSF1, where it adjusts the number of macrophages to
number of fibroblasts. What the parameter for the ratio, this is exactly the kind of characteristics
that would be dependent on the tissue and properties of ECM and so on. That's where the
tuning of this parameter will change this ratio in a tissue specific way, because not every tissue
has exact same ratio and doesn't need to or should not have. And then there is this,
the inducible enhancer, and that could be dependent on the last expansion of macphage on
DMET during infection inflammation and so on. So that's the picture we see with
this type of relation of macrophage in fibroblasts establishing appropriate cell numbers,
and of course this is just one of the principles. There are many additional, as mentioned, ECM,
how they both sense ECM and whether signals is delivered through cell contact, through diffusion,
or through deposition on ECM. These will provide important variations on the theme,
which need to be individually explored. But what I want to finish here is the notion that there is
how this can be generalized, where we have a cell type, for example, fibroblast that senses
some aspect of tissue environment, for example, space. That space sensing is coupled, in this case,
through hippo pathway, coupled with control of growth factor for another cell type.
And because space availability cell numbers, these are characteristics of tissue homoesthetic
variables, here we just have this simple type of relation unrelated to function, because space
availability is not related to function of macrophage. But then we have other types of
relations where it is related to function. So, for example, sensing oxygen availability in other
environmental factor in tissues now sends through heat one pathway, and negatively regulates
expression of that gap, which is a growth factor for endothelial cell. Now, endothelial cell
functionally is related to oxygen availability. So, if oxygen level is low, if derepressed,
undiogenesis occurs, oxygen delivered, and oxygen level goes back to normal. And that type of relation
now can be expanded as I will elaborate in the next slide. But there are additional types,
so this raises the question of what are aspects of tissue environment that are sense, all the aspects
of tissue environment that are sense in a way that translates into control of specific growth
factor production. And how that, because each growth factor controls specific cell types,
how the cell type is related to this factor that is sensed, that controls production.
And that, I think, what defines the rules. It's one set of rules, it's not all rules,
but it's one set of rules that defines how growth factor expression is regulated.
So, here we have the homeostatic control, which is unrelated to this functional role of the cells.
It's just, it's calibrated. You always need enough macrophages. So, it's calibrated on the
pollution time scale. You always need this many, you know, this ratio, this percentage of macrophages.
But then, in addition, you can have expansion on demand. If there's infection need more macrophages,
so this growth factor will go up. If you have hypoxia, you will need more endothelial cells,
this growth factor will go up. If there is this X, some other environmental factor of tissue,
you need more of cell X, and you produce growth factor for cell X. And then, when we looked at
imposing different kind of perturbations on cell to mimic these deviations in tissue environment.
So, we used hypoxia, glucose deprivation, I mean acid deprivation, ER stress, osmotic stress,
and so forth, oxidative stress. And then, looked at the expression of genes and fibrolysis, and we
find a whole range of growth factors are regulated by these perturbations, which brings up the
possibility of exploring what the logic is in each individual case, because for each growth factor,
there is a corresponding cell type that's controlled by it. Often, for even perturbation,
you will need more than one cell type, of course, and that's why you will see that some of them induce
most of them induce more than one growth factor. So, sensing of the environment by one cell type
is linked to control population size of another cell type that is functionally related to whatever
that environmental perturbation reflects. And so, to generalize this, we can say it acts as
anything that determines the requirement for Y. Let's say there is a lot of, I don't know,
garbage, you need more genitors, right? And then you have a sensor that determines that there is
a lot of garbage. So, that would be the cell that determines that X is there, and therefore,
you need Y to take care of X. If it's hypoxia, you need endothelial smells. If it's infection,
you need neutrophil. If it's some kind of other type of perturbation, you need a particular
cell type. And then, the way that it operates is what I call functional demand. So, in this case,
what the underlying logic is that if X is detected, that means there is a demand for the function of
the cell Y that can take care of X. So, this is a sensing of functional demand
by cell X. So, it sends demand for function of cell Y, produces growth factor for cell Y,
cell Y expands, performs the function, functional demand is eliminated, and it goes back to steady
state. And in this fashion, cell X knows which growth factor to make. Remember the question of
identity, how do cells know which growth factor? It knows which growth factor, and it knows how
much to make. It depends on how much of functional demand there is. And it doesn't have to be only
growth factor. It could be any signal that can fulfill this circuit. It could be an expansion
of the cells, but it could also be a recruitment, or it could be activation of the function Y
that will remove that demand. And that now goes to a more general type of control circuits that
operate also in physiological settings and so forth. But for growth factor production, I think
that's what determines their functionality. Okay, so I will, instead of continuing in the same way,
in what I will do, I wanted to finish with something very different, not different, but
with notions related to what I started with, thinking about what I talked about most of my
talk is about examples of approaching these questions of tissue, social organization of tissues,
social lives of cells from the perspective of trying to look for underlying principles and rules.
And of course, as you all know, this is the general sort of strategy and general
paradigm and complex systems where you have multiple agents that interact with each other,
according to some rules, and that generates, generates, there is
emerging properties that are consequences of these interactions. And of course,
then the pictures like this that are emerging properties of interactions from agents,
patient or births, these are the observables. And the observables often fascinating, but
understanding them from the perspective that would be the first instinct to understand them,
to describe the size, the number of fish and what they're thinking, what they, you know,
what their glucose level is, measuring their RNA expression levels and proteomics and so forth.
These are going to be totally useless to understanding how you form this type of structures.
And instead, we need to understand what are the rules that generated them.
But again, what we're dealing with is these observables. And I made this very kind of a toy
example to illustrate something that I think for you would be very familiar intellectually,
that let's say this is the observable, this is what you see in microscope or through some other
type of experiment. And you try to understand how is this generated. This is some kind of a
structure you see it could be some arrangement of cells in the tissue or whatnot. And of course,
this would be very misleading if you tried to kind of use your immediate instinct to think that
there is something that generated curve structure. Right. Then if we know that actually, it's part
of this structure is just that you can see there are four repeated units and three of them are
black. And you cannot see them, or three of them are made up by cells that died in the as a part of
the developmental program. And you left only with this one on the left. And but in reality,
it's actually symmetrical structure. Not only it's curved by cement, but it's still curved. So
you're still thinking, well, how do you generate curve structure? And then we add mask, additional
layer. And now we look here. And now we see that these are actually
curve structure. Now we the white stripes become visible. And once they are visible, now we see,
oh, this is just slightly skewed hexagon. And we know exactly how to make a hexagon. And this is
just one line of code to say, you know, draw hexagon and instead of instead of 120 degrees,
you turn by 121 degrees. And now it's slightly skewed, and you iterate that and you get curve
structure. And if you remove some parts of it and end up with what's on the left, then there is no
way to tell how you made it. So the point being that the rule to generate this is very simple rule.
Just drawing hexagon and slightly skewing the angle. As a result, you have this spiral
lock structures, then you remove parts of them and you can have a curve. And if you look at the
curve, there's it's very hard to tell if not impossible to tell how it was generated. And
so what we deal with often is these observables, which which are several steps removed from the
rules that generated them. The rules themselves are extremely simple. But the observable, the curve
is emergent property here, usually, but how it generates them. And we can see that more clearly
with some cell automata types of examples, where you look at this final structure here,
and you try to understand how it was generated. It's hard to tell by looking at it, but that's
the observable. Now, if you look at it carefully, you start seeing, well, there is some symmetry here.
And if you look at symmetry, you apply coarse-graining and see that, well, this unit
actually repeated four times this one. In this unit, you also start seeing symmetry. It's also
repeated four times in this structure, then it's repeated four times in this structure. And that
is generated by these types of rules. So these are two rules. I mean, these are completely randomly
chosen just for illustration purposes to say that these are the rules that generate this.
The way they generate is through iteration and based on local information only and based on
only information available at the time of execution of the rules. You don't need to have
memory. You don't need to have global information. But the point is that if we know the rules,
of course, we can generate easily these structures. And we understand them completely when we know
the rules. But if you go the other way, which is the way we're usually forced to go because
what's observable is going from the other end, we have this structure. We try to understand the rule
and we can't because we don't know. There are no universal methods to do so. So we have to,
instead of characterizing more and more detail, what that is, we try to figure out what are the
original structures that generated them. And this is what basically
point that what we need to understand is what are the rules of interaction.
And of course, then there are many fascinating questions about specific mechanisms, pathways
and so forth. But if we simplify it down to the bare minimum, if you think about what cells can do,
cells can do five things. They can do nothing. So that's an identity operation. They can die,
they can copy, they can change identity, and they can change location. I'm sorry,
set identity twice, I meant it in different ways. This is cell identity and this is identity
operation, meaning that it's a, it's unity. It's doing nothing. So these are five things
that cells can do. There's nothing else. Everything is variation on these five things. Of course,
most variations comes from changing identity, which is cell state, cell type, and so forth.
But ultimately, this is, everything is a combination of these five actions. And this first action,
do nothing, is also an active action because you don't just stay as you are. You often, well,
a cell always needs a signal that tells it to stay as you are. Don't die, don't proliferate,
don't move. It's also an active process. So for each of these, there is a corresponding
types of signals that tell them do A, B, C, D, or E. And so now if you think of all the language
of cell communication, all the words that cells can hear and utter, all of them, we can say, can
fall into five categories, whether they tell cells to do A, B, C, D, or E. And that is sort
of the direction we are going in our thinking of defining the language based on, of course,
the interpretation of different signals also depends on the function of the state. It's not
just that a particular biochemical signal always means A or B. It also depends on cell state,
just like in any communication. And those are the very basic and general sort of description of
the types of rules we are seeking to find. So I'll stop here and take any questions. Thank you.